# standard-doctrine
Documenting the underlying intuitions we have about software.

Like every human community, software and systems engineers have dogma about their profession. Though the field’s self-image is grounded in reasoning, measurement, and experimentation, any experienced practitioner knows that important best practices are often entirely without evidential support. Consider the fact that Dijkstra’s famous letter Goto Considered Harmful, immensely important for language design in the period, was written before there was any meaningful testing. More recently, the useful and highly influential Design Patterns are, in essence, documented practitioner anecdotes unsupported by a larger articulated theory, and test-driven development, equally if not more influential, has a very well articulated rationale, but again no strong evidence it’s meaningfully better than any other approach.

Those examples are relatively benign: for example, Dijkstra was definitely directionally correct. But there are many others with less evidence and more rhetoric, and their overall effects have been less benign. One example is the legend of the 10x engineer, usually attributed to a 1968 paper with relatively weak experimental evidence, which nonetheless continued to influence hiring for the next 50+ years. Another is the endless array of productivity frameworks, most claiming universal applicability, none of which achieved the order-of-magnitude improvement Brooks’s No Silver Bullet said was impossible, despite immeasurable money, time, and effort being spent.

As a field, we rarely reflect deeply on how we come to believe things about software and systems engineering. Software is a complex, mostly social act; it would be hard to measure at the best of times, and evidence-based software engineering does not attract as much funding or attention as software engineering itself. But we don’t do ourselves favours with how we approach it. Sometimes our threshold for believing something is high, sometimes low; sometimes an appeal to authority is sufficient, sometimes not. Sociologically, our understanding of the interplay of knowledge transfer, community, and authority is not very sophisticated, and it is hard to see this improving soon.

It is hard not to conclude that our intuition about how software is best constructed is the real determinant of what we do in the industry. Which makes it all the stranger that so little about this intuition is actually written down.
